---
layout: page
title: /uses
---

On this page I am listing stuff I am using to get my work done, as suggested by [uses.tech](https://uses.tech/).

## Smartphone

My smartphone is a [Google Pixel 8](https://store.google.com/at/product/pixel_8). I am quite happy with it, because of
its relatively small size, its good camera, and the fact that it is running stock [Android](https://www.android.com).

## Laptop

For development (and actually also everything else laptop-related) I use a [MacBook Pro
16"](https://www.apple.com/at/macbook-pro/) with a M2 Pro processor. I really like the hardware, however, I think that
the user experience of Apple software is subpar at best. I hope I can use my MacBook with Linux one day.
[AsahiLinux](https://asahilinux.org/) looks promising already, but I doubt it is a good idea to use it on a everyday
basis currently. I hope at some point I will find the time to give it a try!

## Browser

As a browser I use [Mozilla Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/firefox/). I really like its privacy features and also
think that it is important that we have more than one browser engine. As with many other things I try to avoid using
extensions as much as possible, since I feel like they might make software less stable. The only exceptions are an
extension making [Ecosia](https://www.ecosia.org/) the default search engine, since I like the idea of saving the world
a bit while doing searches on the internet, and maybe some development tools, depending on which projects I am currently
working on.

## Editor

I use [Neovim](http://neovim.io/) as an editor respectively IDE exclusively. In contrast to popular belief it supports
quite a lot, including auto-completion and debugging (at least with some extensions). Maybe it takes a bit more time to
set everything up the way you like it, but in my opinion it is totally worth it. My [Neovim
configuration](https://github.com/danrot/dotfiles/blob/master/nvim/init.lua) is available on GitHub.

## Terminal

Since I am programming using Neovim, I am spending most of my time in a terminal, which is
[kitty](https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/) in my case. It is incredibly fast and is highly configurable. I also like that
it has built-in support for tabs and window splits. This means there is no need for an additional terminal multiplexer
like tmux, which did never work very well for me, especially when I wanted to copy multiple lines from the terminal. My
[kitty configuration](https://github.com/danrot/dotfiles/blob/master/kitty/kitty.conf) is also available on GitHub. In
the same folder I have some `.kitty` files, which I use to setup new tabs for certain situations.

The shell I am using is [fish](https://fishshell.com/), which works pretty well out of the box. I love that it parses
the man pages installed on the system and provide auto completions based on it. I am also making heavy use of its
[abbreviation feature](https://fishshell.com/docs/current/interactive.html#abbreviations). My entire [fish
configuration](https://github.com/danrot/dotfiles/blob/master/fish/config.fish) is also available on GitHub.
